# r0LL (Final Project, SYSBAS1B)

### Introduction
This repository contains the files to @elmermakkinga and @layetri's final project for the Music & Technology SYSBAS course at HKU University of the Arts Utrecht, the Netherlands. The result is a game called "r0LL", written in P5.js, with a sound generation engine written in MaxMSP. Try it live at [layetri's website](https://mt.layetri.nl/projects/roll).

### Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Classes](#classes)
- [OSC Routes](#osc-routes)

## Installation
To get started, make sure you have `nodejs` and `npm` installed. This project depends on `express`, which is already included in `package.json`.
To install, browse to the project root directory and run `npm install`. NPM will now install the project dependencies. After this, you can use `npm start` to start the server at `your_local_ip:8001`.

## Classes
### `Player` class
The `Player` class renders the Player, which is a user controlled orb interacting with the `World` and `Obstacle` classes.

#### Methods
- `draw()` draws the player orb on the screen as a sphere at the current `player.position` with size `player.size`.
- `move()` is an umbrella function that calls `player.gravity()`, `player.draw()`, `player.collide()` and the global `calibrateViewer()`. It calculates the individual `player.xSpeed` and `player.zSpeed` from the total `player.speed` and adjusts the `player.position` accordingly. It also updates the UI's speed display.
- `spin()` calculates the global `xzAngle` rotation based on user input. The `xzAngle` dictates both the distribution of `player.speed` over the X and Z axises, as well as the camera rotation. It updates the UI's angle display.
- `gravity()` adjusts `player.position.y` according to the `World`'s `getCurrentY()` method.
- `inertia()` increments the `player.speed` while it isn't greater than `player.maxSpeed` according to the user input (`ARROW_DOWN` increases the speed, `ARROW_UP` decreases the speed until it reaches `player.maxSpeed * -1`).
- `spinertia()` (UNTESTED) increases the `player.spinSpeed` while the left or right arrow key is pressed. This gives an inertia effect to the rotation movement.
- `collide()` detects collisions with any `Obstacle` class objects in the `World`. If any collisions occur at a `player.speed` greater than 60% of its `maxSpeed`, it locks the `player`'s controls by activating the `player.selfControlled` flag and triggers the `player.bounceOff()` method.
- `bounceOff()` freezes the rendering process and bounces the `player` by moving its `position.y` along a parabola calculated based on the `player.speed` at inverted speed on the X and Z axises. It single-frames the rendering process at a 200ms interval, until the animation length reaches the animation duration time calculated based on a `speed / maxSpeed` fraction of 6000ms. Once the bounce animation is complete, it resumes the rendering process and hands back control to the user.

#### Usage
First, in the `setup()` of `sketch.js`, a new `Player()` is created with the `fov` variable as its only argument. It is then rendered after the `World` and `Obstacle` classes, since the `Player` depends on values provided by these classes to function. The `handleKeys()` function is first called to guide user input to the right places, after which `player.move()` and `player.rotate()` are called. After that, a check is ran that provides control locking for the ending animation by setting the `player.selfControlled` flag to true if the remaining time is less than 5 seconds.

### `Obstacle` class
The `Obstacle` class renders obstacles in the `World`. When the `Player` collides with one, it triggers a `player.bounceOff()` event.

#### Methods
- `draw()` draws the obstacle. It also triggers the `Obstacle.gravity()` method and, if `type` is set to `moving`, calls the `Obstacle.move()` method too.
- `move()` moves the obstacle within its `range.x` and `range.z` bounds. It reverses the individual axis speeds when a boundary is hit.
- `gravity()` adjusts `Obstacle.y` according to the `World`'s `getCurrentY()` method.

#### Usage
For each two `Terrain` classes generated by `World.fillArea()`, an `Obstacle` is created within the boundaries of the current area.

### `Terrain` class
The `Terrain` class renders the individual planes from which the `World` is made up.

#### Methods
- `init()` initializes the `Terrain` with its `index` as the only argument. It calculates the Y position for the plane by taking an average of the Y position of its predecessor ob both the X and Z axis. For the X and Z positions, it takes the current position of the `World`'s renderer (`World.fillArea()`).
- `draw()` draws the `Terrain` as a cube. If the game is in its final stage (5 seconds before `length`), it moves the plane's Y position in order to achieve the "world falling apart" effect.

#### Usage
The `Terrain` class is only called from `World.fillArea()` and shouldn't be used outside this method's scope, as it's an essential part of the rendering process.

### `World` class
The `World` class is an umbrella class which renders the `Terrain` and `Obstacle` classes, while also providing position information to the `Player` (like `getCurrentPlane()` and `getCurrentY()`).

#### Methods
- `init()` fills the `World` by calling `World.fillArea()` with its initial boundaries as its arguments.
- `draw()` first calls the `World.applyFOV()` method to adjust the `planes` array where needed. After that, it draws every plane in the `planes` array by calling the `Terrain`'s `draw()` method.
- `fillArea()` first initializes the global `rayX` and `rayZ` variables to the top left corner of its assigned rendering area. It calculates the amount of planes needed to fill the area, after which the rendering process is started. For each needed plane, it first pushes a new `Terrain` onto the `planes` array and calls its `init()` method. After that, it adjusts the global `rayZ` by one position in the desired direction (increase when `rayInvert` is false, otherwise decrease). When the renderer hits the second `zBound`, the rendering process is inverted. This process repeats until the global `rayX` equals the second `xBound` and the rendering process is complete. The rendered area is then filled with `Obstacle` classes (one for every two planes).
- `applyFOV()` draws an imaginary square around the `Player` within which the `World` is rendered. The amount of planes that fit in this square is rounded up, so that the rendered `World` always covers the entire Field Of View. Planes that are outside of these bounds are obsolete and get deleted to save resources. At the end of each run, all out-of-bounds `Obstacle`s are removed.
- `getCurrentPlane()` filters the `planes` array for the one(s) in which a given `[x, z]` position is contained.
- `getCurrentY()` takes the first result of `World.getCurrentPlane()` to get the Y value for a given `[x, z]` position.

#### Usage
In `setup()`, the `World` class is the first class to be created and initialized, since all other classes depend on parameters available to them through the `World` class. Its `draw()` method is then called in p5's `draw()` function.

## OSC Routes
### `/started`
Boolean that indicates that the game has been started and hasn't ended yet. This message is sent once when the startBtn is clicked (a `1` value), and once more when the timer ends (a `0` value).

### `/player`
Collection that has three sub-addresses for the current `x`, `y` and `z` position of the `player` class. All three are integers that are updated at the refresh rate of the client.

### `/player/angle`
Float that indicates the amount of degrees that the `player` class is rotated horizontally. The starting position is `0` and it has a range of `[-180, 180]`.

### `/player/speed`
Float that indicates the current total speed of the `player` class.

### `/player/xSpeed` & `/player/zSpeed`
Floats that indicate the current speed of the `player` class on both horizontal axises. These are a fraction of the total speed.

### `/plane/removed` & `plane/added`
Event emitted when planes are removed or added to the world.

### `/bouncing`
Boolean that indicates when a `player.bounceOff()` event happens. It emits a `1` value while the player orb bounces, and results to `0` otherwise.

### `/night`
Boolean that indicates when `nightMode` is triggered. This message is emitted once when the game scene turns to night. The value is always a `1`. It won't be emitted when `nightMode` is inactive.

### `/clock`
Integer that holds the current `clock` value in seconds. This message is sent with every `clock` update cycle.

### `/endOfTime`
Boolean that is triggered once when the End Of Time is reached (5 seconds before the game length). It holds a value of `1`.